---
title: "Mitnick Attack"
date: 2023-04-23
permalink: /posts/2023/04/mitnick/
tags:
  - network
  - security
---

# Container Environment

All machines are on the same LAN.

X-Terminal Victim at 10.9.0.5
Trusted Server at 10.9.0.6
Attacker machine at 10.9.0.1


# Configuration

The X-Terminal machine needs a .rhosts file to simulate Tsutomu Shimomura's set up. This .rhosts file allows the Server to rsh into the X-Terminal machine without a password.

```
# su seed 
$ cd 
$ touch .rhosts 
$ echo 10.9.0.6 > .rhosts
$ chmod 644 .rhosts
```

Then on the Server we can verify that the X-Terminal recognizes the Server's IP address.

```
# su seed
$ rsh 10.9.0.5 date
```

And we should see the date command executes on the X-Terminal machine and the output is displayed on the Server's terminal.


We also need to simulate a preliminary SYN flood attack against the Server.

The reason we must first conduct a SYN flood attack against the Server requires some explanantion. Later in the Mitnick attack, we will spoof a SYN packet that appears to come from the Server and is destined for the X-Terminal. Upon receiving this packet, the X-Terminal will send a SYN+ACK packet in the second step of the TCP handshake. In doing so, the X-Terminal will first need to obtain the MAC address of the Server. It does so with an ARP request. But, if the Server is muted, the Server will not be able to answer the ARP request asking for its MAC address, and the X-Terminal will never be able to send the SYN+ACK packet and the attack is foiled.

In the real attack, it was known with high probability to Kevin Mitnick that the Server's MAC address was already in the X-Terminal's ARP cache, a store of known MAC addresses. So, Mitnick could mute the Server with no worry. We can ping the Server from the X-Terminal once. 

Or, for a more permanent solution, we can use the following command to add the Server's MAC address to the ARP cache.

```
# arp -s 10.9.0.6 [Server's MAC]
```

You have to get the Server's MAC by running ifconfig in the Server's terminal and getting the value of the ether entry under the network interface starting with "br-"




