---
title: "Linux `perf_event` Subsystem Overview"
date: 2023-04-03
permalink: /posts/2023/04/perf_event/
tags:
  - tech
  - web
---

This is the first post in a series about the Linux `perf_event` subsystem. I aim to provide a high level overview of the subsystem then go into details in future installments.

Users of modern processors typically have a set of special-purpose registers at their disposal for performance profiling. These Hardware Performance Counters (HPC) organized into a Performance Monitoring Unit (PMU) tally one micro-architectural event at a time with the original intent of performance analysis for debugging and tuning. The PMU has since been implicated in real-time system dynamic resource allocation, malware detection and large-scale computation systems. Google uses HPCs for performance isolation in its cloud compute servers and to monitor its data centers where efficiency improvements of just 1% can mean savings of millions of dollars. On such systems, each core contains an associated PMU.

Linux offers control of the PMU through the Linux `perf\_event` subsystem. The sub-system includes the `perf\_event\_open()` system call. This interface allows usersto configure the PMU to count system-specific events at the process context level. Additionally, the Linux `perf` user space program is included with the subsystem.The perf tool uses the `perf\_event\_open()` syscall in its implementation of a command line interface that allows users to interact with the kernel to profile work-load applications and or system-wide behavior, see data in real-time, and generate reports with visualization tools.

That is a brief introduction to the Linux `perf\_event` subsystem. In the next post, I will go over installing the `perf` user space tool and show some of its capabilities.